Websockets Tutorial (#663)
winglang/docsite: blog/2023-10-22-websockets-app.md

---

> title: "Builing a Websockets app with Winglang"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Building a WebSocket app with Winglang"
```

> description: A step by step Winglang tutorial for builing serverless websocket applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: A step by step tutorial for building serverless WebSocket applications in Winglang
```

authors: 
  - eladcon
tags: [winglang, websockets, application, server side]
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

In this tutorial we're going to use Winglang to build a web based application powered by websockets. We will cover how to build basic resources in Winglang with a special focus on serverless cloud abilities. We will learn how to integrate JS code into our Wing app and
how to test our application end-to-end for our local environment as well as our cloud. 

### A Websocket server

Since Websockets are still not supported natively in Winglang, we will create a websockets resource ourselves. This will allow us to abstract the cloud and its underlying resources, so all of our server logic will be the same no matter where it will run.

First thing first, let's define a wing interface that could help represent websockets support:

```js
pub interface IWebsocketsApi {
  onConnect(fn: inflight (str): void);
  onDisconnect(fn: inflight (str): void);
  onMessage(fn: inflight (str, str): void);
  inflight send(connectionId: str, message: str): void;
  inflight url(): str;
}
```

> For each WS event - a client connected, a client disconnected and a message recieved - we are configuring an inflight handler which will accept a connection ID (and additional message) and will allow us to react with our respective application logic. Additionaly, we will implement sending a message to a specific connection. Finally, we want to know the server URL, so client could connect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each WS event - a client connected, a client disconnected and a message recieved - we are configuring an inflight handler which will accept a connection ID (and additional message) and will allow us to react with our respective application logic. Additionally, we will implement sending a message to a specific connection. Finally, we want to know the server URL, so client could connect.
```

  var connectFn: inflight (str): void;
  var disconnectFn: inflight (str): void;
  var onmessageFn: inflight (str, str): void;
  _url: sim.State;

  init() {
    this.connectFn = inflight () => {};
    this.disconnectFn = inflight () => {};
    this.onmessageFn = inflight () => {};
    this._url = new sim.State();
    new cloud.Service(inflight () => {
      let res = WebSocketApi_sim.startWebSocketApi(this.connectFn, this.disconnectFn, this.onmessageFn);
      this._url.set("service_url", res.url());
      return () => {
        res.close();
      };
    });
  }

  pub onConnect(fn: inflight (str): void) {
    this.connectFn = fn;
  }

  pub onDisconnect(fn: inflight (str): void) {
    this.disconnectFn = fn;
  }

  pub onMessage(fn: inflight (str, str): void) {
    this.onmessageFn = fn;
  }

  extern "./websockets-api-local.js" static inflight startWebSocketApi(
    connectFn: inflight (str): void,
    disconnectFn: inflight (str): void,
    onmessageFn: inflight (str, str): void
  ): StartWebSocketApiResult;
  extern "./websockets-api-local.js" static inflight sendMessage(
    connectionId: str,
    message: str,
  ): inflight(): void;

> }

Reviewer 3: I would recommend consolidating all extern calls to `ws` under a single module called `ws.w` with a `Util` class. This has the undocumented side effect that you can call the static methods without the class name. It also makes it cleaner from a code organization perspective.

Something like this:

`ws.w`

```js
pub class Util {
  extern "./ws.js" pub static inflight startServer(
    connectFn: inflight (str): void,
    disconnectFn: inflight (str): void,
    onmessageFn: inflight (str, str): void
  ): StartWebSocketApiResult;

  extern "./ws.js" pub static inflight sendMessage(
    connectionId: str,
    message: str,
  ): inflight(): void;
}
```
 
Then:

`main.w`:

```js
bring "./ws.w" as ws;

ws.startServer(...)
```

Yes, it works...

With all of our application code ready, we can create a Wing Test to verify everything works on every platform we are running on:

```js
interface WebsocketTestClient {
  inflight send(message: str);
  inflight messages(): Array<str>;
}

class Util {
  extern "./websockets-client.js" pub static inflight initWebsocket(
    url: str,
  ): WebsocketTestClient; 
}

test "can send and recieve messages" {
  let client1 = Util.initWebsocket(wss.url());
  let client2 = Util.initWebsocket(wss.url());

  // wait for clients to connect
  util.waitUntil(inflight () => {
    return connections.list().length == 2;
  }, timeout: 5s);

  client1.send("hello");

  util.waitUntil(inflight () => {
    return client2.messages().length > 0;
  }, timeout: 3s);

  assert(client2.messages().length == 1);
  assert(client2.messages().at(0) == "hello");
}
```

## Summary

In this tutorial we have created a full Websockets server ready to be deployed on the cloud but can also be debugged and tested locally. We created all of our infrastructure straight from our code which also seamlessly include our custom logic. See the full code here https://github.com/eladcon/wing-websockets.

> Winglang is stil growing as a language and it's eco system is developing rapidly. Make sure to follow us on https://winglang.io. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Winglang is still growing as a language and it's ecosystem is developing rapidly. Make sure to follow us on https://winglang.io. 
```
